Problem (Fix #82): reward mechanisms not defined precisely (#94)
crypto-com/chain-docs: docs/modules/rewarding.md

# Rewarding

## Abstract

Rewarding module enable crypto chain to reward protocol participators, the design should meet following requirements:

- Fixed total supply.
- Fairness, all honest participators should get rewards, non-participators should not.

> - The rewards amount a validator received should be proportional to the voting power.

Reviewer: the last point is a bit unclear -- the emitted amount to all validators is proportional to the total vote power. The received share should be proportional only to participation?

Author: I changed to "The rewards amount distributed to a validator should be proportional to his voting power", the minted amount will be explained in the monetary expansion section, it's related to total staking, but not necessarily proportional.

The basic idea is to record signing voters for each block, along with the voting power at the vote time. Distribute the reward pool according to the voting powers.

### Concepts

#### Signing voters

Signing voters are defined as:

```rust
begin_block_req
  .last_commit_info
  .votes
  .filter(|vote| vote.signed_last_block)
```

All the signing voters of each block get rewarded, if a validator don't participate in voting, it doesn't get rewarded.

#### Reward period

Rewards are distributed to the validators periodically.

#### Reward pool

During the reward period, the following sources of rewarding are accumulated into reward pool:

- Monetary expansion
- [Transaction Fees](../getting-started/transaction.md#transaction-fee)
- Slashings

#### Monetary expansion

New coins are minted into the reward pool at the end of reward period. The amount is calculated based on the total staking of the last block.

TODO explan the formula.

#### Fixed point arithemetic

TODO

## Implementation

### Network parameters

```rust
pub struct RewardsParameters {

>     /// Time inteval in seconds to do rewards distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Time interval in seconds to do rewards distribution
```

    pub reward_period_seconds: u64,

    /// Maximum monetary expansion for rewards.
    pub monetary_expansion_cap: Coin,
    /// Monetary expansion formula parameter
    pub monetary_expansion_r0: Milli,
    /// Monetary expansion formula parameter
    pub monetary_expansion_tau: u64,
    /// Monetary expansion formula parameter

>     pub monetary_expansion_decay: u64,

Reviewer: required ranges?

Reviewer: should `monetary_expansion_tau` be called `initial_tau` or something like that if it decays?

Author: > required ranges?

Added the validation code.

Author: > should `monetary_expansion_tau` be called `initial_tau` or something like that if it decays?

Since they are all in `InitNetworkParameters`, I think the init part if implicit already?

}
```

### State

```rust
/// Participate in the computation of app_hash, empty block should not modify
pub struct RewardsPoolState {
    /// Reward pool other than the monetary expansion accumulated in current period
    pub period_bonus: Coin,
    /// last block height that updated it (i64 from Tendermint protobuf)
    pub last_block_height: BlockHeight,
    /// last reward distribution time, default to the genesis time
    pub last_distribution_time: Timespec,
    /// Record how many coins have been minted, can't exceed the cap
    pub minted: Coin,
    /// Parameter in monetary expansion formula, decayed for each rewards distribution

>     pub tau: u64,

Reviewer: `current_tau` to make it clearer that it may be different from the initial one?

Author: Done

}

pub struct ValidatorState {
    ...

    /// Statistics of signing voters along with the sum of voting powers at the vote time,
    /// the sum is capped at `u64::MAX`
    signing_voters: HashMap<StakingAddress, u64>,
}

pub struct ChainNodeApp {
    pub rewards_pool_updated: bool
}
```

### ABCI Events

#### Begin block

```rust
    fn begin_block(&mut self, req: &RequestBeginBlock) -> ResponseBeginBlock {
        self.last_state
            .as_mut()
            .unwrap()

>             .validators

Reviewer: this is a sort of "implementation detail" and likely to change

Author: Cleaned up the code, moved the accidental things into separated functions.

                |vote| {
                    if vote.signed_last_block {
                        Some(
                            vote.validator
                                .get_ref()
                                .address
                                .as_slice()
                                .try_into()
                                .expect("Invalid address in vote_info"),
                        )
                    } else {
                        None
                    }
                },
              )
            );
        if let Some((distributed, minted)) = self.rewards_try_distribute() {
            // write events into block results
        }
    }
```

Helpers:

```rust
    /// Record signing voters
    pub fn record_voters_for_rewarding(
        &mut self,
        addrs: impl Iterator<Item = TendermintValidatorAddress>,
    ) {
        for addr in addrs {
            if let Some(staking_address) = self.tendermint_validator_addresses.get(&addr) {
                if let Some(voting_power) = self
                    .validator_state_helper
                    .get_voting_power(staking_address)

>                 {

Reviewer: same

Reviewer: many unnecessary details all below (plus the semantics of many of these detailed items isn't define, unless one looks at the code right now, so can be out of date -- e.g. `self.tendermint_validator_addresses`)

Author: Cleaned up the code, moved the accidental things into separated functions.

# Rewarding

## Abstract

Rewarding module enable crypto chain to reward protocol participators, the design should meet following requirements:

> - Fixed total supply.

Author: Changed it to "The total supply of CRO is fixed"

> - Fairness, all honest participators should get rewards, non-participators should not.

Author: The sentence after it explains it: "all honest participators should get rewards, non-participators should not".

> - Fairness, all honest participators should get rewards, non-participators should not.

Reviewer: where does this definition come from? 
the common one is:
```
3 (fairness). A process gets a reward for a block if and only if it has a reward parameter for that block equal to 1. 
3' (eventual fairness). There exists a height H such that for a block in the blockchain at height H′ > H a process gets a reward for that block if and only if it has a reward parameter for that block equal to 1.
```

- The rewards amount a validator received should be proportional to the voting power.

> The basic idea is to record signing voters for each block, along with the voting power at the vote time. Distribute the reward pool according to the voting powers.

Author: Added an example now.

### Concepts

#### Signing voters

Signing voters are defined as:

> ```rust

Reviewer 2: One needs to know **Rust** and **ABCI internals** to understand what are **Signing voters**. Maybe add a bit more description?

Author: "All the active validators who follow the protocol honestly will be recorded as signing voters."
Added this sentence, should be enough for people to understand it.

begin_block_req
  .last_commit_info
  .votes
  .filter(|vote| vote.signed_last_block)
```

All the signing voters of each block get rewarded, if a validator don't participate in voting, it doesn't get rewarded.

#### Reward period

> Rewards are distributed to the validators periodically.

Reviewer 2: Also specify that this can be changed using network parameter in `genesis.json`.

Author: Done

#### Reward pool

During the reward period, the following sources of rewarding are accumulated into reward pool:

> - Monetary expansion

Reviewer 2: What does monetary expansion mean? Add a small definition and also link to the **Monetary expansion** section.

Author: Added a link.

- [Transaction Fees](../getting-started/transaction.md#transaction-fee)
- Slashings

#### Monetary expansion

New coins are minted into the reward pool at the end of reward period. The amount is calculated based on the total staking of the last block:

```
R0 = rewards_config["monetary_expansion_r0"]
tau = rewards_config["monetary_expansion_tau"]
P = rewards_config["distribution_period"]

# total bonded amount of the active validators at the end of the reward epoch

> S = total_staking

Reviewer 2: How is `total_staking` calculated?

Author: There is a "total staking" section now which explains it.

# seconds of a year
Y = 365 * 24 * 60 * 60

R = (R0 / 1000) * exp(-S / tau)
N = floor(S * (pow(1 + R, P / Y) - 1))
N = N - N % 10000

N: released coins
S: total stakings at current block when reward distribution happens
R0: upper bound for the reward rate p.a.
```

#### Fixed point arithemetic

TODO

## Implementation

### Network parameters

```rust

> pub struct RewardsParameters {

Reviewer 2: At the start of the document, can you explain the role each of these network parameters and how they change reward behavior?

Author: I think the parameters are all explained in different places in part 1.

Reviewer 2: Where is part 1? Am I missing something?

Author: > Where is part 1? Am I missing something?

I mean the section "Abstract".
For example, the monetary expansion parameters R0/tau are in the monetary expansion formula.
The reward period has a section in concepts. I should add more description for the `rewards_monetary_expansion_cap` and `monetary_expansion_decay `.

Author: Done

    pub monetary_expansion_r0: Milli,
    /// Monetary expansion formula parameter
    pub monetary_expansion_tau: u64,
    /// Monetary expansion formula parameter
    pub monetary_expansion_decay: u64,
}
```

### State

```rust
/// Participate in the computation of app_hash, empty block should not modify
pub struct RewardsPoolState {
    /// Reward pool other than the monetary expansion accumulated in current period
    pub period_bonus: Coin,
    /// last block height that updated it (i64 from Tendermint protobuf)
    pub last_block_height: BlockHeight,
    /// last reward distribution time, default to the genesis time
    pub last_distribution_time: Timespec,
    /// Record how many coins have been minted, can't exceed the cap
    pub minted: Coin,
    /// Parameter in monetary expansion formula, decayed for each rewards distribution
    pub tau: u64,
}

pub struct ValidatorState {
    ...

    /// Statistics of signing voters along with the sum of voting powers at the vote time,
    /// the sum is capped at `u64::MAX`
    signing_voters: HashMap<StakingAddress, u64>,
}

pub struct ChainNodeApp {
    pub rewards_pool_updated: bool
}
```

### ABCI Events

> #### Begin block

Reviewer 2: Maybe specify **_in English_**, what should happen during `BeginBlock` and don't expose the whole implementation (as it may change in future).

Author: Added some simple descriptions before that code.

                );
                continue;
            }
            account.add_reward(amount).unwrap();
            account_root =
                update_staked_state(account.clone(), &account_root, &mut self.accounts).0;
            distributed.push((*addr, amount));
            state
                .validators
                .validator_state_helper
                .voting_power_update(&account, state.minimum_effective().into());
        }

        // Remains of distribution goes back to the reward pool
        state.top_level.rewards_pool.period_bonus = remains;
        self.uncommitted_account_root_hash = account_root;
        // Result will be written into block result event list
        Some((distributed, minted))
    }
```

##### `monetary_expansion`

TODO

#### Commit

Set `last_block_height` if `RewardsPoolState` changes:

```rust
    pub fn commit_handler(&mut self, _req: &RequestCommit) -> ResponseCommit {
        if self.rewards_pool_updated {
            top_level.rewards_pool.last_block_height = new_state.last_block_height;
            self.rewards_pool_updated = false;
        }
    }
```

> ### Hooks

Reviewer 2: No explanation of these **Hooks** and also no mention of where these should be called from.

Author: Added more descriptions in the hook section, please review again.

# Rewarding

## Abstract

Rewarding module enable crypto chain to reward protocol participators, the design should meet following requirements:

- The total supply of CRO is fixed.
- Fairness, all honest participators should get rewards, non-participators should not.

> - The rewards amount distributed to a validator should be proportional to his voting power.

Reviewer: The total reward emitted should be proportional to the total voting power,

but the distributed amount should be proportional to the correct participation (assuming distribution doesn't happen every block due to performance degrade).

Author: total reward emitted could be positively or negatively related to the total voting power, not necessarily proportional(maybe I have a wrong understanding of proportional?).
"correct participation" is the second point?

Reviewer: I'm confused if the third point talks about the share or the total emitted reward?

Author: > I'm confused if the third point talks about the share or the total emitted reward?

It says "The rewards amount distributed to a validator", so it's the share of a single validator, how should I make it clearer?

Reviewer: Well, one of the points of this was:

1. total emitted amount should be proportional to the total vote power (as before)
2. individual shares should correspond to correct behaviour participation, *regardless* of the vote power

And the correct behaviour is defined with the respect to individual blocks with "IF AND ONLY IF" for each block -- it's not defined as "As long as a validator exhibited correct behaviour in 1 block out of N in a given, he should get reward for all N blocks"

Author: “total emitted amount should be proportional to the total vote power” is not accurate, fees and slashings are not related to total vote power, the amount of new minted coins is a function of total vote power, but not necessarily proportional to that.

By "regardless of the vote power", do you mean one vote of A power and one vote of B power should get same amount of reward?

Reviewer: > “total emitted amount should be proportional to the total vote power” is not accurate, fees and slashings are not related to total vote power, the amount of new minted coins is a function of total vote power, but not necessarily proportional to that.

emitted means it's newly emitted, so doesn't include fees or slashing -- perhaps more precise is inversely proportional or what's out of the formula.
it can say that the "total reward includes total emitted coins (proportional to ...) and bonus"

> By "regardless of the vote power", do you mean one vote of M power and one vote of N power should get the same amount of reward?
It depends on their correct behaviour.
If both behaved correctly (live, non-byzantine) at all times, yes

Author: > > By "regardless of the vote power", do you mean one vote of M power and one vote of N power should get the same amount of reward?
> 
> It depends on their correct behaviour.
> If both behaved correctly (live, non-byzantine) at all times, yes

Do you mean a validator with 10 power get the same reward as a validator with 1 power, if they both behaved correctly at all times? Isn't this just incentivize the validator with more power to separate his power into multiple smaller validators, and takes more validator spots, and which is something we want to avoid?

Reviewer: Ignore that -- it was my misunderstanding of how the activity is recorded.

        self.rewards_pool_mut().minted = (self.rewards_pool().minted + minted).unwrap();

        // Total reward pool for this period
        let reward_pool = (self.rewards_pool().period_bonus + minted).unwrap();

        let sum_power = self
            .validator_state()
            .signed_voters
            .values()
            .fold(0u64, |acc, n| acc.saturating_add(*n));

        // Compute the rewards distribution,
        // compute `reward_pool * power / sum_power` for each participator
        let mut distribution: RewardsDistribution = vec![];
        let remains = if sum_power > 0 {
            // Remaining coins after distribution
            let mut remains = reward_pool;

            for (addr, &power) in self.validator_state().signed_voters.iter() {
                // Use u128 to prevent overflow of intermidiate results
                let amount: u128 =
                    u128::from(reward_pool) * u128::from(power) / u128::from(sum_power);
                let amount = Coin::new(amount.try_into().unwrap()).unwrap();
                remains = remains.saturating_sub(amount);
                distribution.push((*addr, amount));
            }

>             remains

Reviewer: this is still "unfair" (as per the agreed definition):

1. it only tracks "IF" the validator correctly participated, not how often
2. it distributes per vote power share, not per participation.

--
(eventually) fair reward distribution should reward a node for each block if and only if it participated correctly (live, non-byzantine).

...
Here, the counter-example is that if there are more than 1 block during that period, it won't be fair. e.g. a node:
block 1 -- participated (gets recorded)
block 2 -- ... no ...
block 3 -- ... no ...
...
blocks N -- distribution -- gets rewarded for all blocks up to N, regardless how it behaved in each of them which is unfair.

Author: You seem to try to distribute rewards per block, but I think they are actually equivalent:
```
block 1 -- reward parameter=1, power of A=p, power of others=p'
block 2 -- reward parameter=0
block 3 -- reward parameter=0
...
blocks N -> distribution
``` 
Assuming all the other validators have reward parameter=1, then the reward distribution of A is:

```
total_power = p + p' * N

# current computation
reward_a = reward_pool * p / total_power

# only focus on block 1
reward_block1 = reward_pool * (p + p') / total_power
reward_a = reward_block1 * p / (p + p')
         = reward_pool * p / total_power
```

Author: > where does this definition come from?
> the common one is:
> 
> 3 (fairness). A process gets a reward for a block if and only if it has a reward parameter for that block equal to 1. 
> 3' (eventual fairness). There exists a height H such that for a block in the blockchain at height H′ > H a process gets a reward for that block if and only if it has a reward parameter for that block equal to 1.

I think it's just the 3 in layman's term?

Reviewer: normal fairness gets that reward for that block.

eventual fairness gets reward for that block in some time in the future -- the important bit here there is " if and only if it ".

In the current mechanism, yes, it gets a reward for that block AND it also gets rewards for blocks where its reward parameter=0 (as the current mechanism doesn't distinguish correct participation) which it shouldn't

Author: > normal fairness gets that reward for that block.
> 
> eventual fairness gets reward for that block in some time in the future -- the important bit here there is " if and only if it ".
> 
> In the current mechanism, yes, it gets a reward for that block AND it also gets rewards for blocks where its reward parameter=0 (as the current mechanism doesn't distinguish correct participation) which it shouldn't

As I showed in the previous comment, it only gets the reward for blocks where its reward parameter = 1, not get rewards for blocks where its reward parameter=0.
I copy it here:

> You seem to try to distribute rewards per block, but I think they are actually equivalent:
> ```
> block 1 -- reward parameter=1, power of A=p, power of others=p'
> block 2 -- reward parameter=0
> block 3 -- reward parameter=0
> ...
> blocks N -> distribution
> ``` 
> Assuming all the other validators have reward parameter=1, then the reward distribution of A is:
> 
> ```
> total_power = p + p' * N
> 
> # current computation
> reward_a = reward_pool * p / total_power
> 
> # only focus on block 1
> reward_block1 = reward_pool * (p + p') / total_power
> reward_a = reward_block1 * p / (p + p')
>          = reward_pool * p / total_power
> ```
> 
>

Author: Do you mean don't accumulate rewards into a pool for whole period, but calculate reward distribution for each block separately. Because different blocks might have different fees collected?

Reviewer: it's defined with "IF AND ONLY IF" -- e.g. two validators A B, both have the same vote power.
Node A:
```
block 1 -- reward parameter=1
block 2 -- reward parameter=0
block 3 -- reward parameter=0
...
```
Node B:
```
block 1 -- reward parameter=1
block 2 -- reward parameter=1
block 3 -- reward parameter=1
...
```

reward gets distributed at N -- currently, the share calculation takes into account only vote power... so here, A and B have the same vote power, so they get reward the same.
If it's interpreted per block, this does not satisfy (eventual) fairness, as participants should be reward IF AND ONLY IF... here, A was rewarded for blocks 2, 3...

Author: > it's defined with "IF AND ONLY IF" -- e.g. two validators A B, both have the same vote power.
> Node A:
> 
> ```
> block 1 -- reward parameter=1
> block 2 -- reward parameter=0
> block 3 -- reward parameter=0
> ...
> ```
> 
> Node B:
> 
> ```
> block 1 -- reward parameter=1
> block 2 -- reward parameter=1
> block 3 -- reward parameter=1
> ...
> ```
> 
> reward gets distributed at N -- currently, the share calculation takes into account only vote power... so here, A and B have the same vote power, so they get rewarded the same.
> When interpreted per block, this does not satisfy (eventual) fairness, as participants should be reward IF AND ONLY IF... here, A was rewarded for blocks 2, 3...

In this case, the computation is like this:
```
pa = power of A
pb = power of B
sum_power = pa + pb * N
sum_power_a = pa
sum_power_b = pb * N
reward_a = reward_pool * sum_power_a / sum_power
reward_b = reward_pool * sum_power_b / sum_power
```

Reviewer: Oh, https://github.com/crypto-com/chain-docs/pull/94/files#diff-2c819a76ed9cc68e5c8a8d51dc8ac205R208 there's a `saturating_add`

Reviewer: I skimmed through it and only saw "insert"

Reviewer: Anyway, this shows that a more high-level concise description or pseudocode will be clearer than 100+ lines of detailed code where it is hard to spot the important parts

Reviewer: `record_voters_for_rewarding` could just be something like:
```
if signed_voters[staked_address]:
signed_voters[staked_address] += vote_power_at_X
else:
signed_voters[staked_address] = vote_power_at_X
```

Author: > `record_voters_for_rewarding` could just be something like:
> 
> ```
> if signed_voters[staked_address]:
> signed_voters[staked_address] += vote_power_at_X
> else:
> signed_voters[staked_address] = vote_power_at_X
> ```

But it will miss two informations:
- overflow behavior
- Error handling when address and voting power not found

Reviewer: Is any of them expected to happen as a part of normal behaviour?

It'll ideally list all its assumptions / invariants separately -- e.g. it's assumed that one can lookup staking address (based on the consensus pubkey/address) for the duration of the reward period, unless it's been removed due to punishment mechanisms?

For expected behaviour, it should specify these.
For unexpected behaviour, there should be an overall note around handling -- e.g. unexpected behaviour / invariant breaking behaviour will be logged with "error" level in deployment builds, but will panic in debug/fuzzing/test builds?

```
p: voting power of validator A
p': sum of voting power of all other validators

block1: participators: p', p
block2: participators: p'
block3: participators: p'
...
blockN: participators: p'

# The rewards of A is:
reward_a = reward_pool * p / (p + p' * N)
```

The result of reward distribution should be written into events of block results.

### Concepts

#### Reward participator

All the validators who follow the protocol honestly should participate in the reward distribution.

In tendermint's terms, following the protocol honestly means being a signed voter in `last_commit_info` of `BeginBlockRequest`.

It can be described precisely as:

```rust
begin_block_req
  .last_commit_info
  .votes
  .filter(|vote| vote.signed_last_block)
```

#### Reward period

Rewards are distributed to the validators periodically, the length of the period is configured in network parameter `reward_period_seconds` in genesis config.

#### Reward pool

During the reward period, the following sources of funds are accumulated into reward pool:

- [Monetary expansion](#monetary-expansion)
- [Transaction Fees](../getting-started/transaction.md#transaction-fee)
- Slashings

> The reward pool get accumulated through the whole reward period, it get distributed once at the end of reward period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reward pool gets accumulated throughout the whole reward period; it gets distributed once at the end of each reward period.
```

> Because of integer calculations, there will be a few remained funds after distribution, they should be left to the next period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to fixed point calculations, there may be a few remainders from arithmetic operations after distribution. These remainder amounts should be left in the rewards pool for the next period.
```

> If there is zero participator for the period, the rewards pool should be left to the next period, rather than get burned.

Reviewer: does this mean that if there were no participants, reward distribution should not happen? When would this happen?

Author: Maybe, all the previous participators get jailed in node state somehow, but still manage to produce the last block of reward period, because tendermint validator set doesn't updated yet.

```
>>> 9223372036854775807 / 10000000000
922337203
```

It should be more than enough for one reward period, but still the implementation should avoid panic or wrap-around when overflows happen in extreme case.

### Predefined symbols

In the following sections, we use following predefined symbols:

- `reward_state` for the current `RewardState`
- `validator_state` for the current `ValidatorState`
- `node_state` for the current `ChainNodeApp`
- `network_parameter` for the current `NetworkParameter`

### ABCI Events

#### Begin block

The main actions all happens in begin block event, it's the time we get reports of participators through `last_commit_info`, also the time the node state is consistent.

1. Collect the validator addresses of reward participators from `last_commit_info`.
2. Record them, and accumulate their voting powers.
3. If a reward period has passed, distribute the reward pool according to the participator statistics.

##### `begin_block`

```rust

> fn begin_block(req: RequestBeginBlock) {

Reviewer: just side-note that I guess it should happen after punishment-related begin block processing? there's a separate issue for this / how to generate validator updates: https://github.com/crypto-com/chain-docs/issues/81 so no need in this PR
